Ganymede Release 1.0.12
March 1, 2004
KNOWNBUGS
----------------------------------------------

Ganymede release 1.0.12 requires Swing 1.1 or later, as it is built to
expect the Swing libraries to be in the package javax.swing, rather
than com.sun.java.swing, as it was in prior versions.  Use of Java JRE
1.3 or later for the clients is highly recommended, as many Swing bugs
are fixed in this release.

--

0) The Ganymede admin console will fail with security exceptions when
run in a browser with any Java 1.2 plugin prior to version 1.2.2, due
to a bug in thread permission allocations in early 1.2 JDK's.  If you
see problems with the Ganymede admin console, try the latest 1.4
plugin.

1) Running the schema editor in the admin console and then not
shutting the console down and reconnecting still seems to be pinning
some memory in the server.  Worse, over time, the amount of memory
effectively pinned seems to increase over time after the schema editor
has been run, until the admin console that edited the schema has
exited.  To avoid this problem, if you see that the Ganymede server's
heap usage seems to increase over days and weeks of uptime and you
have run the schema editor from an open console, trying quitting that
admin console and waiting an hour or so and see if the memory usage
drops back down to baseline.

2) If you try building Ganymede from scratch using Java 1.4, you'll
get a number of deprecation warnings having to do with the org.xml.sax
classes.  The Ganymede distribution includes the public domain
org.xml.sax classes for SAX version 1, but Sun incorporated the SAX
version 2 classes into version 1.4 of the JDK, and marked several
methods as deprecated.  Everything will work fine on 1.4 even with the
built-in org.xml.sax classes, though, despite the warnings.

Comments welcome.

ganymede@arlut.utexas.edu for the list, or
ganymede_author@arlut.utexas.edu to comment to us.

